During the business and understanding phase, I discovered:

The problem involves analysing dataframes representing relationships between items in our 
database, and detecting items whose pattern of connections could be considered ‘anomalous’ and 
potentially cause issues for searches executed using our web and API resources. Hard-coding rules 
for all potential anomalies is too time-consuming and difficult. There are too many potential 
relationships between items/item types, and it’s too time consuming to create and maintain this 
list of rules. It also requires ‘expert knowledge’ that CLOSER staff may not have; we may not know 
that a certain relationship between items is required, or what relationships may be problematic. 
The DDI-XML datatypes and schemas used in our system may change over time, requiring us to 
continuously create new rules, or abandon old rules. If I have a labelled dataset where input 
features represent a set of item relationships and the label/target variable is a flag indicating 
if the item is/isn’t anomalous, I can train an ML model to predict if an item requires attention,
e.g. correction/removal from our database.

IsolationForest analysis is useful for detecting outlier items which may be anomalies.

The business outcome is a reduction in the amount of developer time and code used to 
detect errors/issues in our data that affect user experience.

Technical impact can be measured in terms of the number of anomalous items found and corrected in 
our data repository using this solution. These anomalous items reduce the quality of data 
retrieved from API queries on our repository and reduce the user experience when exploring our 
data via our web portal. The business impact can be measurable in terms of the amount of developer 
time and code required to implement error checking/data quality controls in CLOSER data.

The solution is feasible, I can obtain the data required for this solution by querying the CLOSER 
repository API. There are no risks or constraints preventing us from implementing the solution.

The dataset I am working with does not have the labels required by this project; items are not 
flagged as anomalous/non-anomalous. Therefore I took the data representing item relationships, 
and perform dimension reduction by using an unsupervised ML approach, Principal Components 
Analysis (PCA). I identify outliers in the PCA data using an IsolationForest. I examined those 
outliers and labelled them as either genuine anomalies OR items that just have unusual connection 
patterns.

A supervised model (e.g. decision tree) is trained on this human-labelled data; the input features 
are the numbers representing relationships that an item has with other items, and the target 
variable is the labels I provided: 0 = no problem, 1 = anomaly.

Correcting errors and removing unnecessary items from our data leads to an improvement in our data 
quality and a better experience for users of CLOSER resources, e.g. social science researchers 
will benefit from more complete/relevant results when using CLOSER’s web and API resources to 
search for data to support their research activities, thus increasing the use and impact of 
longitudinal population studies.
